README.md, before:

# SDN-Lab-5
Learn L2switch project. Later, we will use L2switch project as the basis to build customized SDN applications.

## Virtual Machine Summary
Memory: >= 8GB

Storage: 50GB

CPU: 2 cores, AMD64 Architecture

Installation Disc: [ubuntu-22.04.4-desktop-amd64.iso](https://old-releases.ubuntu.com/releases/22.04/)

## References
[An Instant Virtual Network on your Laptop (or other PC)](https://mininet.org/)

[PICOS 4.4.3 Configuration G](https://pica8-fs.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/PicOS443sp/overview?homepageId=10453009)

[OpenDaylight Flow Examples](https://docs.opendaylight.org/projects/openflowplugin/en/latest/users/flow-examples.html)

[L2switch User Guide](https://test-odl-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user-guide/l2switch-user-guide.html)
## Preparation
0. If the system doesn't have enough disk space:
   
   (1) Shut down the VM. In the VMWare Fusion settings->Hardware Disk-> Enlarge the Disk allocation.
   
   (2) Power on the VM. Install growpart (if not installed):
   ```
   sudo apt update
   sudo apt install cloud-guest-utils
   ```
   (3) Expand partition 2
   ```
   sudo growpart /dev/nvme0n1 2
   ```
   Expected output:
   ```
   CHANGED: partition=2 ...
   ```
   (4) Resize ext4 filesystem
   ```
   sudo resize2fs /dev/nvme0n1p2
   ```
   (5) Verify
   ```
   df -h
   ```
   You should see something like this:
   ```
   /dev/nvme0n1p2   98G   18G   80G   19%   /
   ```
1. Install compatible Java:
   
   (1) Install Java 21:
   ```
   sudo apt install openjdk-21-jdk
   ```
   (2) List installed Java versions
   ```
   sudo update-alternatives --config java
   ```
   You should see something like:
   ```
   There are 2 choices for the alternative Java (providing /usr/bin/java).
   Selection    Path                                         Priority   Status
   * 0            /usr/lib/jvm/java-21-openjdk-arm64/bin/java   2111      auto mode
     1            /usr/lib/jvm/java-17-openjdk-arm64/bin/java   1711      manual mode
     2            /usr/lib/jvm/java-21-openjdk-arm64/bin/java   2111      manual mode
   
   Press <enter> to keep the current choice[*], or type selection number: 
   ```
   (3) Configure Java Home for Java 21
   ```
   sudo vim /etc/profile
   ```
   Point Java Home to Java 21, instead of 17
   ```
   JAVA_HOME=/usr/lib/jvm/java-21-openjdk-amd64
   #JAVA_HOME=/usr/lib/jvm/java-17-openjdk-amd64
   PATH=$PATH:$HOME/bin:$JAVA_HOME/bin
   export JAVA_HOME
   export JRE_HOME
   export PATH
   ```
   (4) Make JAVE_HOME valid and Test JAVA Version
   ```
   source /etc/profile
   java -version
   ```
2. Install compatible Maven:
   
   (1) Install maven 3.9.6
   ```
   cd /tmp
   MAVEN_VER=3.9.6

   curl -fL -o apache-maven-${MAVEN_VER}-bin.tar.gz \
   https://archive.apache.org/dist/maven/maven-3/${MAVEN_VER}/binaries/apache-maven-${MAVEN_VER}-bin.tar.gz

   ls -lh apache-maven-${MAVEN_VER}-bin.tar.gz
   tar -xzf apache-maven-${MAVEN_VER}-bin.tar.gz
   sudo rm -rf /opt/maven
   sudo mv apache-maven-${MAVEN_VER} /opt/maven
   ```
   (2) Add Maven Path:
   ```
   echo 'export MAVEN_HOME=/opt/maven' >> ~/.bashrc
   echo 'export PATH=$MAVEN_HOME/bin:$PATH' >> ~/.bashrc
   source ~/.bashrc
   hash -r
   mvn -version
   ```
   You should see Maven 3.9.6.
   
3. Download the code:
   ```
   git clone https://github.com/mzc796/SDN-Lab-5.git
   ```
4. Build L2switch project:
   ```
   cd SDN-Lab-5/
   mvn clean install -DskipTests -Dcheckstyle.skip
   ```
5. Run OpenDaylight-L2switch
   ```
   cd distribution/karaf/target/assembly/bin/
   sudo ./karaf
   ```
6. Run Mininet. Open a new terminal:
   ```
   sudo mn --topo tree,depth=3,fanout=2 --switch ovsk,protocols=OpenFlow13 --controller remote,ip=127.0.0.1,port=6653
   ```
   ```
   s1
   ├── s2
   │   ├── s3
   │   │   ├── h1
   │   │   └── h2
   │   └── s4
   │       ├── h3
   │       └── h4
   └── s5
       ├── s6
       │   ├── h5
       │   └── h6
       └── s7
           ├── h7
           └── h8
   ```
7. Check default configuration.
   (1) Observe default flow entries. For example:
   ```
   cd SDN-Lab-5/mn/
   sudo ./dump_flows.sh s3
   ```
   (2) Observe topology.
   ```
   cd SDN-Lab-5/odl-scripts/
   sudo ./req_topo.sh
   ```
   Note: Remember what you observed.
8. `ping` hosts and observer flow entries. In the mininet terminal:
   (1)
   ```
   h1 ping h2
   ```
   In the system terminal:
   ```
   sudo ./dump_flows s3
   ```
   (2)
   ```
   h1 ping h3
   ```
   In the system terminal:
   ```
   sudo ./dump_flows s3
   ```
   Question: Observe cases (1) and (2), and reason about the difference. 
   
9. Request the topology after ping. In a system terminal:
   ```
   cd SDN-Lab-5/odl-scripts/
   sudo ./req_topo.sh
   ```
   Read the `topo.json` file. What is the change compared to the topology observed at Step 7 (2)? 
10. Change the source code to make the link ID of the links between the host and the switch start with "hello-".
    For example, "link-id": "hello-openflow:3:2/host:ea:09:0d:5c:77:31" instead of "openflow:3:2/host:ea:09:0d:5c:77:31".

Commit message:

Update README with clearer disk space instructions
Clarified instructions for insufficient disk space error.

README.md, after:

# SDN-Lab-5
Learn L2switch project. Later, we will use L2switch project as the basis to build customized SDN applications.

## Virtual Machine Summary
Memory: >= 8GB

Storage: 50GB

CPU: 2 cores, AMD64 Architecture

Installation Disc: [ubuntu-22.04.4-desktop-amd64.iso](https://old-releases.ubuntu.com/releases/22.04/)

## References
[An Instant Virtual Network on your Laptop (or other PC)](https://mininet.org/)

[PICOS 4.4.3 Configuration G](https://pica8-fs.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/PicOS443sp/overview?homepageId=10453009)

[OpenDaylight Flow Examples](https://docs.opendaylight.org/projects/openflowplugin/en/latest/users/flow-examples.html)

[L2switch User Guide](https://test-odl-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user-guide/l2switch-user-guide.html)
## Preparation
0. If you got an error saying the system doesn't have enough disk space, refer to the following steps in Step 0. Otherwise, start from Step 1.
   
   (1) Shut down the VM. In the VMWare Fusion settings->Hardware Disk-> Enlarge the Disk allocation.
   
   (2) Power on the VM. Install growpart (if not installed):
   ```
   sudo apt update
   sudo apt install cloud-guest-utils
   ```
   (3) Expand partition 2
   ```
   sudo growpart /dev/nvme0n1 2
   ```
   Expected output:
   ```
   CHANGED: partition=2 ...
   ```
   (4) Resize ext4 filesystem
   ```
   sudo resize2fs /dev/nvme0n1p2
   ```
   (5) Verify
   ```
   df -h
   ```
   You should see something like this:
   ```
   /dev/nvme0n1p2   98G   18G   80G   19%   /
   ```
1. Install compatible Java:
   
   (1) Install Java 21:
   ```
   sudo apt install openjdk-21-jdk
   ```
   (2) List installed Java versions
   ```
   sudo update-alternatives --config java
   ```
   You should see something like:
   ```
   There are 2 choices for the alternative Java (providing /usr/bin/java).
   Selection    Path                                         Priority   Status
   * 0            /usr/lib/jvm/java-21-openjdk-arm64/bin/java   2111      auto mode
     1            /usr/lib/jvm/java-17-openjdk-arm64/bin/java   1711      manual mode
     2            /usr/lib/jvm/java-21-openjdk-arm64/bin/java   2111      manual mode
   
   Press <enter> to keep the current choice[*], or type selection number: 
   ```
   (3) Configure Java Home for Java 21
   ```
   sudo vim /etc/profile
   ```
   Point Java Home to Java 21, instead of 17
   ```
   JAVA_HOME=/usr/lib/jvm/java-21-openjdk-amd64
   #JAVA_HOME=/usr/lib/jvm/java-17-openjdk-amd64
   PATH=$PATH:$HOME/bin:$JAVA_HOME/bin
   export JAVA_HOME
   export JRE_HOME
   export PATH
   ```
   (4) Make JAVE_HOME valid and Test JAVA Version
   ```
   source /etc/profile
   java -version
   ```
2. Install compatible Maven:
   
   (1) Install maven 3.9.6
   ```
   cd /tmp
   MAVEN_VER=3.9.6

   curl -fL -o apache-maven-${MAVEN_VER}-bin.tar.gz \
   https://archive.apache.org/dist/maven/maven-3/${MAVEN_VER}/binaries/apache-maven-${MAVEN_VER}-bin.tar.gz

   ls -lh apache-maven-${MAVEN_VER}-bin.tar.gz
   tar -xzf apache-maven-${MAVEN_VER}-bin.tar.gz
   sudo rm -rf /opt/maven
   sudo mv apache-maven-${MAVEN_VER} /opt/maven
   ```
   (2) Add Maven Path:
   ```
   echo 'export MAVEN_HOME=/opt/maven' >> ~/.bashrc
   echo 'export PATH=$MAVEN_HOME/bin:$PATH' >> ~/.bashrc
   source ~/.bashrc
   hash -r
   mvn -version
   ```
   You should see Maven 3.9.6.
   
3. Download the code:
   ```
   git clone https://github.com/mzc796/SDN-Lab-5.git
   ```
4. Build L2switch project:
   ```
   cd SDN-Lab-5/
   mvn clean install -DskipTests -Dcheckstyle.skip
   ```
5. Run OpenDaylight-L2switch
   ```
   cd distribution/karaf/target/assembly/bin/
   sudo ./karaf
   ```
6. Run Mininet. Open a new terminal:
   ```
   sudo mn --topo tree,depth=3,fanout=2 --switch ovsk,protocols=OpenFlow13 --controller remote,ip=127.0.0.1,port=6653
   ```
   ```
   s1
   ├── s2
   │   ├── s3
   │   │   ├── h1
   │   │   └── h2
   │   └── s4
   │       ├── h3
   │       └── h4
   └── s5
       ├── s6
       │   ├── h5
       │   └── h6
       └── s7
           ├── h7
           └── h8
   ```
7. Check default configuration.
   (1) Observe default flow entries. For example:
   ```
   cd SDN-Lab-5/mn/
   sudo ./dump_flows.sh s3
   ```
   (2) Observe topology.
   ```
   cd SDN-Lab-5/odl-scripts/
   sudo ./req_topo.sh
   ```
   Note: Remember what you observed.
8. `ping` hosts and observer flow entries. In the mininet terminal:
   (1)
   ```
   h1 ping h2
   ```
   In the system terminal:
   ```
   sudo ./dump_flows s3
   ```
   (2)
   ```
   h1 ping h3
   ```
   In the system terminal:
   ```
   sudo ./dump_flows s3
   ```
   Question: Observe cases (1) and (2), and reason about the difference. 
   
9. Request the topology after ping. In a system terminal:
   ```
   cd SDN-Lab-5/odl-scripts/
   sudo ./req_topo.sh
   ```
   Read the `topo.json` file. What is the change compared to the topology observed at Step 7 (2)? 
10. Change the source code to make the link ID of the links between the host and the switch start with "hello-".
    For example, "link-id": "hello-openflow:3:2/host:ea:09:0d:5c:77:31" instead of "openflow:3:2/host:ea:09:0d:5c:77:31".
